.. -*- coding: utf-8 -*-

============
 Background
============

Site-directed spin labeling (SDSL) is a common technique to
investigate structure and dynamics of macromolecular
systems. Covalentry attached spin labels are introduced to the system
and induce electron spin resonance.  Double electron electron spin
resonance (DEER) is an EPR technique for measuring distances between
two spin labels that have been covalently attached to a protein. Two
cysteine residues are introduced into the protein and subsequently
labelled. Paramagnetic relaxation enhancement (PRE) is an NMR
technique for measuring distances between a spin label and the amide
protons of the protein backbone. One cysteine residue is introduced at
the position of the label The positions are chosen to report on the
expected conformational change. A commonly used spin label is
(1-oxyl-2,2,5,5-tetramethylpyrroline-3-methyl)-methanethiosulfonate
(MTSL). MTSL has a linker with five rotatable bonds and is therefore
very flexible. The distance distributions between the two spin labels
(DEER) or one spin label and the amide protons are measured by
experiments are typically broad and often multi-modal. The
distributions are therefore a convolution of the flexibility of the
MTSL spin label and the conformational spread of the proteins in the
sample. To ensure that we compared like with like we developed a
method that

1. maps rotamer libraries of the MTSL spin label onto each position,

2. discards those rotamers that sterically clash with the protein
   (typically distances <2 Ã…) and

3. calculates all (weighted) distance pairs between the remaining
   rotamers and 

4. thereby estimates a distance distribution for that structure. 

The code was written in Python using the MDAnalysis_ library
[Michaud-Agrawal2011]_ and rotamer libraries for MTSL (2011, 2017)
[Polyhach2011]_.

Our approach improves upon the existing method [Polyhach2011]_ by
increasing computational efficiency and implementing, via the
MDAnalysis library, analysis of ensembles of hundreds of structures,
which allowed us to estimate distance distributions for entire
simulation trajectories. In the case of PRE measurements, it enables
the user to calculate back the transverse relaxation enhancement to
compare raw data without calculating the distances based on the
experiment.

In the case of MTSL, the distances are determined by considering the
position of the free electron located between nitrogen (N1) and (O1).

Examples of the application of this approach can be found in
[Stelzl2014]_.


.. _MDAnalysis: https://www.mdanalysis.org

